# Abstracts of Papers

## Physics
### Hyperbolic sine-Gordon model beyond the first threshold
**Authors**: Tadahiro Oh, Younes Zine

**Published Date**: 2025-04-10

**Updated Date**: 2025-04-10

**PDF Url**: [2504.07944v1](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2504.07944v1)

**Abstract**: We study the hyperbolic sine-Gordon model, with a parameter $\beta^2 > 0$,
and its associated Gibbs dynamics on the two-dimensional torus. By introducing
a physical space approach to the Fourier restriction norm method and
establishing nonlinear dispersive smoothing for the imaginary multiplicative
Gaussian chaos, we construct invariant Gibbs dynamics for the hyperbolic
sine-Gordon model beyond the first threshold $\beta^2 = 2\pi$. The
deterministic step of our argument hinges on establishing key bilinear
estimates, featuring weighted bounds for a cone multiplier. Moreover, the
probabilistic component involves a careful analysis of the imaginary Gaussian
multiplicative chaos and reduces to integrating singularities along space-time
light cones. As a by-product of our proof, we identify $\beta^2 = 6\pi$ as a
critical threshold for the hyperbolic sine-Gordon model, which is quite
surprising given that the associated parabolic model has a critical threshold
at $\beta^2 =8\pi$.


### Riemann zeros and the KKR determinant
**Authors**: Zongrui Pei

**Published Date**: 2025-04-10

**Updated Date**: 2025-04-10

**PDF Url**: [2504.07928v1](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2504.07928v1)

**Abstract**: We transform the counting function for the Riemann zeros into a
Korringa-Kohn-Rostoker (KKR) determinant, assisted by Krein's theorem. This is
based on our observation that the function derived from a few methods can all
be recast into two terms: one corresponds to the scattering phase, and the
other is similar to structure constants related to the Green function. We also
discuss the possible physical realizations. Our method provides a new physical
pathway towards the solution of the Riemann hypothesis.


### SKK groups of manifolds and non-unitary invertible TQFTs
**Authors**: Renee S. Hoekzema, Luuk Stehouwer, Simona Veselá

**Published Date**: 2025-04-10

**Updated Date**: 2025-04-10

**PDF Url**: [2504.07917v1](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2504.07917v1)

**Abstract**: This work considers the computation of controllable cut-and-paste groups
$\mathrm{SKK}^{\xi}_n$ of manifolds with tangential structure $\xi:B_n\to
BO_n$. To this end, we apply the work of Galatius-Madsen-Tillman-Weiss, Genauer
and Schommer-Pries, who showed that for a wide range of structures $\xi$ these
groups fit into a short exact sequence that relates them to bordism groups of
$\xi$-manifolds with kernel generated by the disc-bounding $\xi$-sphere. The
order of this sphere can be computed by knowing the possible values of the
Euler characteristic of $\xi$-manifolds. We are thus led to address two key
questions: the existence of $\xi$-manifolds with odd Euler characteristic of a
given dimension and conditions for the exact sequence to admit a splitting. We
resolve these questions in a wide range of cases.
  $\mathrm{SKK}$ groups are of interest in physics as they play a role in the
classification of non-unitary invertible topological quantum field theories,
which classify anomalies and symmetry protected topological (SPT) phases of
matter. Applying our topological results, we give a complete classification of
non-unitary invertible topological quantum field theories in the tenfold way in
dimensions 1-5.


### Quantum Rods and Clock in a Gravitational Universe
**Authors**: Hao Geng

**Published Date**: 2024-12-04

**Updated Date**: 2025-04-10

**PDF Url**: [2412.03636v3](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2412.03636v3)

**Abstract**: Local operators are the basic observables in quantum field theory which
encode the physics observed by a local experimentalist. However, when gravity
is dynamical, diffeomorphism symmetries are gauged which apparently obstructs a
sensible definition of local operators, as different locations in spacetime are
connected by these gauged symmetries. This consideration brings in the puzzle
of reconciling our empirical world with quantum gravity. Intuitively, this
puzzle can be avoided using relatively defined observables when there exists a
natural reference system such as a distribution of galaxies in our universe.
Nevertheless, this intuition is classical as the rods and clock defined in this
way may also have quantum fluctuations so it is not a priori clear if it can be
realized in the quantum regime. In this letter, we provide an affirmative
answer to this question. Interestingly, we notice that the quantum fluctuations
of the reference system are in fact essential for the realization of the above
intuition in the quantum regime.


### Temporal Tensors and Quantum Shortcut Dynamics in a Supermaze of Multidimensional Time
**Authors**: Koffka Khan

**Published Date**: 2025-04-10

**Updated Date**: 2025-04-10

**PDF Url**: [2504.07900v1](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2504.07900v1)

**Abstract**: We develop a theoretical framework that unifies concepts of multiple time
dimensions, quantum shortcut dynamics, and complex topological structures
('supermazes') to explore novel phenomena in quantum and classical systems. In
particular, we introduce a Temporal Tensor Formalism to describe
multidimensional time, define Quantum Shortcut Operators that enact
near-instantaneous state transitions, and incorporate these into a supermaze
topological model inspired by labyrinthine geometry and network complexity. We
show how this framework can give rise to surprising effects such as anomalous
thermodynamic relaxation (analogous to the Mpemba effect) in quantum systems.
Theoretical implications for quantum computing (including quantum cloud
networks) are discussed, and connections are drawn to established mathematical
paradoxes and physical principles.


### The Constituent Quark Model
**Authors**: D. R. Entem, F. Fernández, P. G. Ortega, J. Segovia

**Published Date**: 2025-04-10

**Updated Date**: 2025-04-10

**PDF Url**: [2504.07897v1](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2504.07897v1)

**Abstract**: In this chapter we give a pedagogical introduction to the constituent quark
model. The explanation of magnetic moments of the nucleons was crucial to
introduce an effective quark mass for light quarks that nowadays are understood
as an effect of Spontaneous Chiral Symmetry Breaking in QCD. We give an
overview of the first applications of the model and an introduction to the most
modern developments studying states beyond the naive quark model as tetraquarks
and pentaquarks.


### Doubly Quantum Mechanics
**Authors**: Vittorio D'Esposito, Giuseppe Fabiano, Domenico Frattulillo, Flavio Mercati

**Published Date**: 2024-12-08

**Updated Date**: 2025-04-10

**PDF Url**: [2412.05997v3](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2412.05997v3)

**Abstract**: Motivated by the expectation that relativistic symmetries might acquire
quantum features in Quantum Gravity, we take the first steps towards a theory
of ''Doubly'' Quantum Mechanics, a modification of Quantum Mechanics in which
the geometrical configurations of physical systems, measurement apparata, and
reference frame transformations are themselves quantized and described by
''geometry'' states in a Hilbert space. We develop the formalism for
spin-$\frac{1}{2}$ measurements by promoting the group of spatial rotations
$SU(2)$ to the quantum group $SU_q(2)$ and generalizing the axioms of Quantum
Theory in a covariant way. As a consequence of our axioms, the notion of
probability becomes a self-adjoint operator acting on the Hilbert space of
geometry states, hence acquiring novel non-classical features. After
introducing a suitable class of semi-classical geometry states, which describe
near-to-classical geometrical configurations of physical systems, we find that
probability measurements are affected, in these configurations, by intrinsic
uncertainties stemming from the quantum properties of $SU_q(2)$. This feature
translates into an unavoidable fuzziness for observers attempting to align
their reference frames by exchanging qubits, even when the number of exchanged
qubits approaches infinity, contrary to the standard $SU(2)$ case.


### The Role of Buffer Gas in Shaping the D1 Line Spectrum of Potassium Vapour
**Authors**: Sharaa A. Alqarni, Danielle Pizzey, Steven A Wrathmall, Ifan G Hughes

**Published Date**: 2025-04-10

**Updated Date**: 2025-04-10

**PDF Url**: [2504.07888v1](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2504.07888v1)

**Abstract**: In this study, we investigate the effect of buffer gas and magnetic field on
the spectral line shapes of the potassium D1 transition using sealed vapour
cells filled with varying amounts of neon as a buffer gas. Employing a
dual-temperature control system, we independently manipulate the cell body and
stem temperatures to explore Doppler and collisional effects on the spectrum.
Our results show how the Voigt spectral profile changes from Gaussian- to
Lorentzian-dominated forms due to pressure broadening and shifts caused by
collisions between potassium atoms and neon. Our measurements are in excellent
agreement with the literature values for potassium-neon collisions. For the
first time we were able to incorporate the buffer-gas shift and broadening into
the modified Voigt profile via the ElecSus code, and found excellent agreement
between the predicted and measured line profiles. We also analyse the potassium
D1 spectral lines in the hyperfine Paschen-Back regime using strong magnetic
fields, demonstrating how Zeeman splitting modifies the pressure-broadened line
shape. This work provides valuable insights into collision-induced broadening
and shifts, enhancing our understanding of potassium spectroscopy and its
application in the development of advanced magneto-optical filters for solar
physics and other applications.


### Self-Evaluated Expertise in experimental physics: a measure of students' physics self-recognition
**Authors**: Michael F. J. Fox, Taylor O. Pomfret

**Published Date**: 2025-04-10

**Updated Date**: 2025-04-10

**PDF Url**: [2504.07885v1](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2504.07885v1)

**Abstract**: We introduce and theoretically justify a new measure of the self-recognition
component of student physics identity called Self-Evaluated Expertise (SEE).
This measure is constructed such that it can be extracted from existing
responses to the E-CLASS. In this work, we compare scores from SEE with the
traditional measure calculated from the E-CLASS, which probes student views
about experimental physics, to show that the SEE score is a quantitatively
different measure. Consequently, we show that student self-recognition
decreases from pre-instruction administration of the E-CLASS to the
post-instruction administration when averaged across data from 494 courses
having taken place between 2016--2019.


## Diffusion
### GenEAva: Generating Cartoon Avatars with Fine-Grained Facial Expressions from Realistic Diffusion-based Faces
**Authors**: Hao Yu, Rupayan Mallick, Margrit Betke, Sarah Adel Bargal

**Published Date**: 2025-04-10

**Updated Date**: 2025-04-10

**PDF Url**: [2504.07945v1](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2504.07945v1)

**Abstract**: Cartoon avatars have been widely used in various applications, including
social media, online tutoring, and gaming. However, existing cartoon avatar
datasets and generation methods struggle to present highly expressive avatars
with fine-grained facial expressions and are often inspired from real-world
identities, raising privacy concerns. To address these challenges, we propose a
novel framework, GenEAva, for generating high-quality cartoon avatars with
fine-grained facial expressions. Our approach fine-tunes a state-of-the-art
text-to-image diffusion model to synthesize highly detailed and expressive
facial expressions. We then incorporate a stylization model that transforms
these realistic faces into cartoon avatars while preserving both identity and
expression. Leveraging this framework, we introduce the first expressive
cartoon avatar dataset, GenEAva 1.0, specifically designed to capture 135
fine-grained facial expressions, featuring 13,230 expressive cartoon avatars
with a balanced distribution across genders, racial groups, and age ranges. We
demonstrate that our fine-tuned model generates more expressive faces than the
state-of-the-art text-to-image diffusion model SDXL. We also verify that the
cartoon avatars generated by our framework do not include memorized identities
from fine-tuning data. The proposed framework and dataset provide a diverse and
expressive benchmark for future research in cartoon avatar generation.


### Hodge Laplacians and Hodge Diffusion Maps
**Authors**: Alvaro Almeida Gomez, Jorge Duque Franco

**Published Date**: 2025-04-10

**Updated Date**: 2025-04-10

**PDF Url**: [2504.07910v1](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2504.07910v1)

**Abstract**: We introduce Hodge Diffusion Maps, a novel manifold learning algorithm
designed to analyze and extract topological information from high-dimensional
data-sets. This method approximates the exterior derivative acting on
differential forms, thereby providing an approximation of the Hodge Laplacian
operator. Hodge Diffusion Maps extend existing non-linear dimensionality
reduction techniques, including vector diffusion maps, as well as the theories
behind diffusion maps and Laplacian Eigenmaps. Our approach captures
higher-order topological features of the data-set by projecting it into
lower-dimensional Euclidean spaces using the Hodge Laplacian. We develop a
theoretical framework to estimate the approximation error of the exterior
derivative, based on sample points distributed over a real manifold. Numerical
experiments support and validate the proposed methodology.


### Revisiting Likelihood-Based Out-of-Distribution Detection by Modeling Representations
**Authors**: Yifan Ding, Arturas Aleksandrauskas, Amirhossein Ahmadian, Jonas Unger, Fredrik Lindsten, Gabriel Eilertsen

**Published Date**: 2025-04-10

**Updated Date**: 2025-04-10

**PDF Url**: [2504.07793v1](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2504.07793v1)

**Abstract**: Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is critical for ensuring the reliability
of deep learning systems, particularly in safety-critical applications.
Likelihood-based deep generative models have historically faced criticism for
their unsatisfactory performance in OOD detection, often assigning higher
likelihood to OOD data than in-distribution samples when applied to image data.
In this work, we demonstrate that likelihood is not inherently flawed. Rather,
several properties in the images space prohibit likelihood as a valid detection
score. Given a sufficiently good likelihood estimator, specifically using the
probability flow formulation of a diffusion model, we show that
likelihood-based methods can still perform on par with state-of-the-art methods
when applied in the representation space of pre-trained encoders. The code of
our work can be found at
$\href{https://github.com/limchaos/Likelihood-OOD.git}{\texttt{https://github.com/limchaos/Likelihood-OOD.git}}$.


### Diffusion-LAM: Probabilistic Limited Area Weather Forecasting with Diffusion
**Authors**: Erik Larsson, Joel Oskarsson, Tomas Landelius, Fredrik Lindsten

**Published Date**: 2025-02-11

**Updated Date**: 2025-04-10

**PDF Url**: [2502.07532v3](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2502.07532v3)

**Abstract**: Machine learning methods have been shown to be effective for weather
forecasting, based on the speed and accuracy compared to traditional numerical
models. While early efforts primarily concentrated on deterministic
predictions, the field has increasingly shifted toward probabilistic
forecasting to better capture the forecast uncertainty. Most machine
learning-based models have been designed for global-scale predictions, with
only limited work targeting regional or limited area forecasting, which allows
more specialized and flexible modeling for specific locations. This work
introduces Diffusion-LAM, a probabilistic limited area weather model leveraging
conditional diffusion. By conditioning on boundary data from surrounding
regions, our approach generates forecasts within a defined area. Experimental
results on the MEPS limited area dataset demonstrate the potential of
Diffusion-LAM to deliver accurate probabilistic forecasts, highlighting its
promise for limited-area weather prediction.


### GOLD: Graph Out-of-Distribution Detection via Implicit Adversarial Latent Generation
**Authors**: Danny Wang, Ruihong Qiu, Guangdong Bai, Zi Huang

**Published Date**: 2025-02-09

**Updated Date**: 2025-04-10

**PDF Url**: [2502.05780v2](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2502.05780v2)

**Abstract**: Despite graph neural networks' (GNNs) great success in modelling
graph-structured data, out-of-distribution (OOD) test instances still pose a
great challenge for current GNNs. One of the most effective techniques to
detect OOD nodes is to expose the detector model with an additional OOD
node-set, yet the extra OOD instances are often difficult to obtain in
practice. Recent methods for image data address this problem using OOD data
synthesis, typically relying on pre-trained generative models like Stable
Diffusion. However, these approaches require vast amounts of additional data,
as well as one-for-all pre-trained generative models, which are not available
for graph data. Therefore, we propose the GOLD framework for graph OOD
detection, an implicit adversarial learning pipeline with synthetic OOD
exposure without pre-trained models. The implicit adversarial training process
employs a novel alternating optimisation framework by training: (1) a latent
generative model to regularly imitate the in-distribution (ID) embeddings from
an evolving GNN, and (2) a GNN encoder and an OOD detector to accurately
classify ID data while increasing the energy divergence between the ID
embeddings and the generative model's synthetic embeddings. This novel approach
implicitly transforms the synthetic embeddings into pseudo-OOD instances
relative to the ID data, effectively simulating exposure to OOD scenarios
without auxiliary data. Extensive OOD detection experiments are conducted on
five benchmark graph datasets, verifying the superior performance of GOLD
without using real OOD data compared with the state-of-the-art OOD exposure and
non-exposure baselines.


