# Abstracts of Papers

## Physics
### Learning Selection Cuts With Gradients
**Authors**: Mike Hance, Juan Robles

**Published Date**: 2025-02-12

**Updated Date**: 2025-02-12

**PDF Url**: [2502.08615v1](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2502.08615v1)

**Abstract**: Many analyses in high-energy physics rely on selection thresholds (cuts)
applied to detector, particle, or event properties. Initial cut values can
often be guessed from physical intuition, but cut optimization, especially for
multiple features, is commonly performed by hand, or skipped entirely in favor
of multivariate algorithms like BDTs or classification networks. We revisit
this problem, and develop a cut optimization approach based on gradient
descent. Cut thresholds are learned as parameters of a network with a simple
architecture, and can be tuned to achieve a target signal efficiency through
the use of custom loss functions. Contractive terms in the loss can be used to
ensure a smooth evolution of cuts as functions of efficiency, particle
kinematics, or event features. The method is used to classify events in a
search for Supersymmetry, and the performance is compared with traditional
classification networks. An implementation of this approach is available in a
public code repository and python package.


### Attractive and repulsive terms in multi-object dispersion interactions
**Authors**: Subhojit Pal, Barry W. Ninham, John F. Dobson, Mathias Boström

**Published Date**: 2024-08-31

**Updated Date**: 2025-02-12

**PDF Url**: [2409.00419v2](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2409.00419v2)

**Abstract**: Filamentary objects such as nano-wires, nanotubes and DNA are of current
interest in physics, nanoscience, chemistry, biology and medicine. They can
interact via exceptionally long-ranged many-object van der Waals (vdW,
dispersion) forces, causing them to cluster into multi-object bundles. We
analyse their vdW interactions quantitatively, predicting $N$-object vdW energy
contributions that alternate in sign with increasing $N$. We also provide novel
insights permitting these tendencies to be understood simply in terms of
electronic screening and anti-screening. Relevant systems include
polyelectrolyte double layers, Nafion exclusion zone, endothelial surface layer
of cells, microemulsion interfaces and hexagonal phases, salt fingers in Gibbs
Marangoni effects, myosin fibres in muscle, multiple nanotubes in the interior
of neuronal axons, and carbon fibre materials.


### Scalable Thermodynamic Second-order Optimization
**Authors**: Kaelan Donatella, Samuel Duffield, Denis Melanson, Maxwell Aifer, Phoebe Klett, Rajath Salegame, Zach Belateche, Gavin Crooks, Antonio J. Martinez, Patrick J. Coles

**Published Date**: 2025-02-12

**Updated Date**: 2025-02-12

**PDF Url**: [2502.08603v1](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2502.08603v1)

**Abstract**: Many hardware proposals have aimed to accelerate inference in AI workloads.
Less attention has been paid to hardware acceleration of training, despite the
enormous societal impact of rapid training of AI models. Physics-based
computers, such as thermodynamic computers, offer an efficient means to solve
key primitives in AI training algorithms. Optimizers that normally would be
computationally out-of-reach (e.g., due to expensive matrix inversions) on
digital hardware could be unlocked with physics-based hardware. In this work,
we propose a scalable algorithm for employing thermodynamic computers to
accelerate a popular second-order optimizer called Kronecker-factored
approximate curvature (K-FAC). Our asymptotic complexity analysis predicts
increasing advantage with our algorithm as $n$, the number of neurons per
layer, increases. Numerical experiments show that even under significant
quantization noise, the benefits of second-order optimization can be preserved.
Finally, we predict substantial speedups for large-scale vision and graph
problems based on realistic hardware characteristics.


### Gravitational waves in massive gravity: Waveforms generated by a particle plunging into a black hole and the excitation of quasinormal modes and quasibound states
**Authors**: Mohamed Ould El Hadj

**Published Date**: 2024-11-25

**Updated Date**: 2025-02-12

**PDF Url**: [2411.16538v2](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2411.16538v2)

**Abstract**: With the aim of testing massive gravity in the context of black hole physics,
we investigate the gravitational radiation emitted by a massive particle
plunging into a Schwarzschild black hole from slightly below the innermost
stable circular orbit. To do so, we first construct the quasinormal and
quasibound resonance spectra of the spin-2 massive field for odd and even
parity. Then, we compute the waveforms produced by the plunging particle and
study their spectral content. This allows us to highlight and interpret
important phenomena in the plunge regime, including (i) the excitation of
quasibound states, with particular emphasis on the amplification and slow decay
of the post-ringdown phase of the even-parity dipolar mode due to harmonic
resonance; (ii) during the adiabatic phase, the waveform emitted by the
plunging particle is very well described by the waveform emitted by the
particle living on the innermost stable circular orbit, and (iii) the
regularized waveforms and their unregularized counterparts constructed from the
quasinormal mode spectrum are in excellent agreement. Finally, we construct,
for arbitrary directions of observation and, in particular, outside the orbital
plane of the plunging particle, the regularized multipolar waveforms, i.e., the
waveforms constructed by summing over partial waveforms.


### Higgs Boson Studies at Future Particle Colliders
**Authors**: J. de Blas, M. Cepeda, J. D'Hondt, R. K. Ellis, C. Grojean, B. Heinemann, F. Maltoni, A. Nisati, E. Petit, R. Rattazzi, W. Verkerke

**Published Date**: 2019-05-09

**Updated Date**: 2025-02-12

**PDF Url**: [1905.03764v3](http://arxiv.org/pdf/1905.03764v3)

**Abstract**: This document aims to provide an assessment of the potential of future
colliding beam facilities to perform Higgs boson studies. The analysis builds
on the submissions made by the proponents of future colliders to the European
Strategy Update process, and takes as its point of departure the results
expected at the completion of the HL-LHC program. This report presents
quantitative results on many aspects of Higgs physics for future collider
projects of sufficient maturity using uniform methodologies.


### Scaling Law for Discharges in Z pinch Devices
**Authors**: Miguel Cárdenas, Alejandro Nettle, Leandro Núñez

**Published Date**: 2025-02-12

**Updated Date**: 2025-02-12

**PDF Url**: [2502.08570v1](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2502.08570v1)

**Abstract**: We consider the snowplow model for studying discharges in Z pinch devices. In
this context, to obtain a complete picture on the physics of those discharges,
we replenish the term disregarded in the original formulation of the snowplow
equations. This is, we now consider not only the magnetic force inward on the
current sheath but we take into account also a force outward on it. Such a
force results from the kinetic pressure of the gas occluded by the current
sheath.
  The internal energy gained by the gas towards the end of the discharge
depends on the full history of the dynamical variables of the system. In other
terms, the internal energy is a functional of the dynamical variables of the
system. We write down the expression for evaluating that internal energy and we
present also the formula for computing the temperature of the gas.
  On this basis, we derive a scaling law that relates the temperature the gas
in a Z pinch experiment would attain with the energetic and spatial wingspan of
the corresponding experimental setup.


### The Role of Conceptual Problem Solving in Learning Physics: A Study in a General Relativity University Course
**Authors**: Matteo Tuveri, Andrea Pierfrancesco Sanna, Mariano Cadoni

**Published Date**: 2025-02-12

**Updated Date**: 2025-02-12

**PDF Url**: [2502.08564v1](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2502.08564v1)

**Abstract**: Effective physics learning, especially in complex topics, requires balancing
mathematical formalism with conceptual understanding. Conceptual
problem-solving involves connecting math to physical reality, and using an
epistemological framework like problem framing helps students justify their
mathematical decisions. This approach deepens students' understanding by
linking theory to practice and enhancing their reasoning skills. This study
explores the effectiveness of conceptual problem-solving in learning complex
topics like general relativity (GR) through a pedagogical framework that
emphasizes the integration of qualitative and quantitative reasoning. Our
investigation, conducted at the University of Cagliari, assessed how students
structure their problem framing and its impact on their conceptual learning of
GR. Results indicate that students who blend conceptual understanding with
mathematical formalism show a deeper grasp of physical principles and improved
problem-solving skills. The research highlights the importance of symbol sense
and the cyclical nature of problem framing, suggesting that a more integrated
approach, incorporating visual, symbolic, and natural language elements, could
enhance students' conceptual understanding. Additionally, the methodology
provides instructors with insights into students' thought processes, enabling
more effective, targeted feedback.


### Machine learning with sub-diffraction resolution in the photon-counting regime
**Authors**: Giuseppe Buonaiuto, Cosmo Lupo

**Published Date**: 2024-06-05

**Updated Date**: 2025-02-12

**PDF Url**: [2406.03179v2](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2406.03179v2)

**Abstract**: The resolution of optical imaging is classically limited by the width of the
point-spread function, which in turn is determined by the Rayleigh length.
Recently, spatial-mode demultiplexing (SPADE) has been proposed as a method to
achieve sub-Rayleigh estimation and discrimination of natural, incoherent
sources. Here we show that SPADE yields sub-diffraction resolution in the
broader context of image classification. To achieve this goal, we outline a
hybrid machine learning algorithm for image classification that includes a
physical part and a computational part. The physical part implements a physical
pre-processing of the optical field that cannot be simulated without
essentially reducing the signal-to-noise ratio. In detail, a spatial-mode
demultiplexer is used to sort the transverse field, followed by mode-wise
photon detection. In the computational part, the collected data are fed into an
artificial neural network for training and classification. As a case study, we
classify images from the MNIST dataset after severe blurring due to
diffraction. Our numerical experiments demonstrate the ability to classify
highly blurred images that would be otherwise indistinguishable by direct
imaging without the physical pre-processing of the optical field.


### The Born rule -- 100 years ago and today
**Authors**: Arnold Neumaier

**Published Date**: 2025-02-12

**Updated Date**: 2025-02-12

**PDF Url**: [2502.08545v1](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2502.08545v1)

**Abstract**: Details of the contents, and formulations of the Born rule changed
considerably from its inception by Born in 1926 to the present day. Based to a
large extent on little known results from the recent books 'Coherent Quantum
Physics' by Neumaier and 'Algebraic Quantum Physics', Vol. 1 by Neumaier and
Westra, this paper traces the early history 100 years ago, its generalization
(essential for today's quantum optics and quantum information theory) to POVMs
50 year ago, and a modern derivation from an intuitive definition of the notion
of a quantum detector. Also discussed is the extent to which the various forms
of the Born rule have, like any other statement in physics, a restricted domain
of validity, which leads to problems when applied outside this domain.


## Diffusion
### Enhancing Diffusion Models Efficiency by Disentangling Total-Variance and Signal-to-Noise Ratio
**Authors**: Khaled Kahouli, Winfried Ripken, Stefan Gugler, Oliver T. Unke, Klaus-Robert Müller, Shinichi Nakajima

**Published Date**: 2025-02-12

**Updated Date**: 2025-02-12

**PDF Url**: [2502.08598v1](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2502.08598v1)

**Abstract**: The long sampling time of diffusion models remains a significant bottleneck,
which can be mitigated by reducing the number of diffusion time steps. However,
the quality of samples with fewer steps is highly dependent on the noise
schedule, i.e., the specific manner in which noise is introduced and the signal
is reduced at each step. Although prior work has improved upon the original
variance-preserving and variance-exploding schedules, these approaches
$\textit{passively}$ adjust the total variance, without direct control over it.
In this work, we propose a novel total-variance/signal-to-noise-ratio
disentangled (TV/SNR) framework, where TV and SNR can be controlled
independently. Our approach reveals that different existing schedules, where
the TV explodes exponentially, can be $\textit{improved}$ by setting a constant
TV schedule while preserving the same SNR schedule. Furthermore, generalizing
the SNR schedule of the optimal transport flow matching significantly improves
the performance in molecular structure generation, achieving few step
generation of stable molecules. A similar tendency is observed in image
generation, where our approach with a uniform diffusion time grid performs
comparably to the highly tailored EDM sampler.


### Mapping the Landscape of Generative AI in Network Monitoring and Management
**Authors**: Giampaolo Bovenzi, Francesco Cerasuolo, Domenico Ciuonzo, Davide Di Monda, Idio Guarino, Antonio Montieri, Valerio Persico, Antonio Pescapè

**Published Date**: 2025-02-12

**Updated Date**: 2025-02-12

**PDF Url**: [2502.08576v1](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2502.08576v1)

**Abstract**: Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI) models such as LLMs, GPTs, and
Diffusion Models have recently gained widespread attention from both the
research and the industrial communities. This survey explores their application
in network monitoring and management, focusing on prominent use cases, as well
as challenges and opportunities. We discuss how network traffic generation and
classification, network intrusion detection, networked system log analysis, and
network digital assistance can benefit from the use of GenAI models.
Additionally, we provide an overview of the available GenAI models, datasets
for large-scale training phases, and platforms for the development of such
models. Finally, we discuss research directions that potentially mitigate the
roadblocks to the adoption of GenAI for network monitoring and management. Our
investigation aims to map the current landscape and pave the way for future
research in leveraging GenAI for network monitoring and management.


### Brain Latent Progression: Individual-based Spatiotemporal Disease Progression on 3D Brain MRIs via Latent Diffusion
**Authors**: Lemuel Puglisi, Daniel C. Alexander, Daniele Ravì

**Published Date**: 2025-02-12

**Updated Date**: 2025-02-12

**PDF Url**: [2502.08560v1](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2502.08560v1)

**Abstract**: The growing availability of longitudinal Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)
datasets has facilitated Artificial Intelligence (AI)-driven modeling of
disease progression, making it possible to predict future medical scans for
individual patients. However, despite significant advancements in AI, current
methods continue to face challenges including achieving patient-specific
individualization, ensuring spatiotemporal consistency, efficiently utilizing
longitudinal data, and managing the substantial memory demands of 3D scans. To
address these challenges, we propose Brain Latent Progression (BrLP), a novel
spatiotemporal model designed to predict individual-level disease progression
in 3D brain MRIs. The key contributions in BrLP are fourfold: (i) it operates
in a small latent space, mitigating the computational challenges posed by
high-dimensional imaging data; (ii) it explicitly integrates subject metadata
to enhance the individualization of predictions; (iii) it incorporates prior
knowledge of disease dynamics through an auxiliary model, facilitating the
integration of longitudinal data; and (iv) it introduces the Latent Average
Stabilization (LAS) algorithm, which (a) enforces spatiotemporal consistency in
the predicted progression at inference time and (b) allows us to derive a
measure of the uncertainty for the prediction. We train and evaluate BrLP on
11,730 T1-weighted (T1w) brain MRIs from 2,805 subjects and validate its
generalizability on an external test set comprising 2,257 MRIs from 962
subjects. Our experiments compare BrLP-generated MRI scans with real follow-up
MRIs, demonstrating state-of-the-art accuracy compared to existing methods. The
code is publicly available at: https://github.com/LemuelPuglisi/BrLP.


### One-Shot Federated Learning with Classifier-Free Diffusion Models
**Authors**: Obaidullah Zaland, Shutong Jin, Florian T. Pokorny, Monowar Bhuyan

**Published Date**: 2025-02-12

**Updated Date**: 2025-02-12

**PDF Url**: [2502.08488v1](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2502.08488v1)

**Abstract**: Federated learning (FL) enables collaborative learning without data
centralization but introduces significant communication costs due to multiple
communication rounds between clients and the server. One-shot federated
learning (OSFL) addresses this by forming a global model with a single
communication round, often relying on the server's model distillation or
auxiliary dataset generation - often through pre-trained diffusion models
(DMs). Existing DM-assisted OSFL methods, however, typically employ
classifier-guided DMs, which require training auxiliary classifier models at
each client, introducing additional computation overhead. This work introduces
OSCAR (One-Shot Federated Learning with Classifier-Free Diffusion Models), a
novel OSFL approach that eliminates the need for auxiliary models. OSCAR uses
foundation models to devise category-specific data representations at each
client, seamlessly integrated into a classifier-free diffusion model pipeline
for server-side data generation. OSCAR is a simple yet cost-effective OSFL
approach that outperforms the state-of-the-art on four benchmarking datasets
while reducing the communication load by at least 99%.


### Poincaré Inequality for Local Log-Polyak-Lojasiewicz Measures : Non-asymptotic Analysis in Low-temperature Regime
**Authors**: Yun Gong, Zebang Shen, Niao He

**Published Date**: 2025-02-08

**Updated Date**: 2025-02-12

**PDF Url**: [2502.06862v2](http://arxiv.org/pdf/2502.06862v2)

**Abstract**: Potential functions in highly pertinent applications, such as deep learning
in over-parameterized regime, are empirically observed to admit non-isolated
minima. To understand the convergence behavior of stochastic dynamics in such
landscapes, we propose to study the class of \logPLmeasure\ measures
$\mu_\epsilon \propto \exp(-V/\epsilon)$, where the potential $V$ satisfies a
local Polyak-{\L}ojasiewicz (P\L) inequality, and its set of local minima is
provably \emph{connected}. Notably, potentials in this class can exhibit local
maxima and we characterize its optimal set S to be a compact $\mathcal{C}^2$
\emph{embedding submanifold} of $\mathbb{R}^d$ without boundary. The
\emph{non-contractibility} of S distinguishes our function class from the
classical convex setting topologically. Moreover, the embedding structure
induces a naturally defined Laplacian-Beltrami operator on S, and we show that
its first non-trivial eigenvalue provides an \emph{$\epsilon$-independent}
lower bound for the \Poincare\ constant in the \Poincare\ inequality of
$\mu_\epsilon$. As a direct consequence, Langevin dynamics with such non-convex
potential $V$ and diffusion coefficient $\epsilon$ converges to its equilibrium
$\mu_\epsilon$ at a rate of $\tilde{\mathcal{O}}(1/\epsilon)$, provided
$\epsilon$ is sufficiently small. Here $\tilde{\mathcal{O}}$ hides logarithmic
terms.


